---
title: "Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind"
date: 2021-02-01
categories: 
  - "books"
  - "history"
draft: true
---

Yuval Noah Harari

### CHAPTER 1. AN ANIMAL OF NO SIGNIFICANCE

- An upright gait required narrower hips, constricting the birth canal

- Women who gave birth earlier, when the infant's brain and head were still relatively small and supple, fared better and lived to have more children. Natural selection consequently favoured earlier births.

- (...) humans are born prematurely, when many of their vital systems are still under-developed.

- Human babies are helpless, dependent for many years on their elders for sustenance, protection and education.

- Lone mothers could hardly forage enough food for their offspring and themselves with needy children in tow. Raising children required constant help from other family members and neighbours. It takes a tribe to raise a human. Evolution thus favoured those capable of forming strong social ties. In addition, since humans are born underdeveloped, they can be educated and socialised to a far greater extent than any other animal.

- (...) the best thing fire did was cook.

- The advent of cooking enabled humans to eat more kinds of food, to devote less time to eating, and to make do with smaller teeth and shorter intestines.

- By shortening the intestines and decreasing their energy consumption, cooking inadvertently opened the way to the jumbo brains of Neanderthals and Sapiens.

- Homo sapiens conquered the world thanks above all to its unique language.

### CHAPTER 2. THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE

- (...) although Sapiens had already populated East Africa 150,000 years ago, they began to overrun the rest of planet Earth and drive the other human species to extinction only bout 70,000 years ago.

- (...) beginning about 70,000 years ago, Homo sapiens started doing very special things. (...) the invention of boats, oil lamps, bows and arrows and needles (essential for sewing warm clothing). The first objects that can reliably be called art date from this era (see the Stadel lion-man), as does the first clear evidence for religion, commerce and social stratification.

- The appearance of new ways of thinking and communicating, between 70,000 and 30,000 years ago, constitutes the Cognitive Revolution.

- Why did it occur in Sapiens DNS rather than in that of Neanderthals? It was a matter of pure chance, as far as we can tell.

- Many animals and human species could previously say, 'Careful! A lion!' Thanks to the Cognitive Revolution, Homo sapiens acquired the ability to say, 'The lion is the quardian spirit of our tribe.' This ability to speak about fictions is the most unique feature of Spiens language. It's relatively easy to agree that only Homo sapiens can speak about things that don't really exist, and believe six impossible things before breakfast. You could never convince a monkey to give you a banana by promising him limitless bananas after death in monkey heaven.

- (...) fiction has enabled us not merely to imagine things, but also to do so collectively. (...) Such myths give Sapiens the unprecedented ability to cooperate flexibly in large numbers. (...) Sapiens can cooperate in extremely flexible ways with countless numbers of strangers.

### CHAPTER 3. A DAY IN THE LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE

- It's a puzzle why we binge on the sweetest and greasiest food we can find, until we consider the eating habits of our forager forebears. In the savannahs and forests they inhabited, high-calorie sweets were extremely rare and food in general was in short supply. A typical forager 30,000 years ago had access to only one type of sweet food - ripe fruit. If a Sone Age woman came across a tree groaning with figs, the most ensible thing to do was to eat as many of them as she could on the spot, before the local baboon band picked the tree bare. The instinct to gorge on high-calorie food was hard-wired into our genes. Today we may be living in high-rise apartments with over-stuffed refrigerators, but our DNA still thinks we are in the savannah. That's what makes some of us spoon down an entire tub of Ben & Jerry's when we find one in the freezer and wash it down with a jumbo Coke.

- Ever since the Cognitive Revolution, there hasn't been a single natural way of life for Sapiens.

### CHAPTER 4. THE FLOOD

- Some scholars try to exonerate our species, placing the blame on the vagaries of the climate. Yet it is hard to believe that Homo sapiens was completely innocent. There are three pieces of evidence that weaken the climate alibi, and implicate our ancestors in the extinction of the Australian megafauna. Firstly, even though Australia's climate changed some 45,000 years ago, it wasn't a very remarkable upheaval. It's hard to see how the new weather patterns alone could have caused such a massive extinction. (...) A third explanation agrees that hunting and fire agriculture played a significant role in the extinction, but emphasises that we can't completely ignore the role of climate. The climate changes that beset Australia about 45,000 years ago destabilised the ecosystem and made it particularly vulnerable. Under normal circumstances the system would probably have recuperated, as had happened many times previously. However, humans appeared on the stage at just this critical juncture and pushed the brittle ecosystem into the abyss. The combination of climate change and human hunting is particularly devastating for large animals, since it attacks them from differnt angles. It is hard to find a good survival strategy that will work simultaneously against multiple threats. Without further evidence, there's no way of deciding between the three scenarios. But there are certaily good reasons to believe that if Homo sapiens had never gone Down Under, it would still be home to marsupial lions, diprotodns and giant kangaroos.

- No previous human species had managed to penetrate places like northern Siberia. Even the cold-adapted Neanderthals restricted themselves to relatively warmer regions further south. But Homo sapiens, whose body was adapted to living in the African savannah rather than in the lands of snow and ice, devised ingenious solutions. When roaming bands of Sapiens foragers migrated into colder climates, they learned to make snowshoes and effective thermal clothing composed of layers of furs and skins, sewn together tightly with the help of needles. They developed new weapons and sophisticated hunting techniques that enabled them to track and kill mannoths and the other big game of the far north. As their thermal clothing and hunting techniques improved, Sapiens dared to venture deeper and deeper into the frozen regions. And as they moved north, their clothes, hunting strategies and other survival skills continued to improve.

### CHAPTER 5. HISTORY'S BIGGEST FRAUD

- The Agricultural Revolution certainly enlarged the sum total of food at the disposal of humankind, but the extra food did not translate into a better diet or more leisure. Rather, it translated into population explosions and pampered elites. The average farmer worked harder than the average forager, and got a worse diet in return. The Agricultural Revolution was history's biggest fraud. Who was responsible? Neigher kings, nor priests, nor merchants. The culprits were a handful of plant species, including wheat, rice and potatoes. These plants domesticated Homo sapiens, rather than vice versa. Think for a moment about the Agricultural Revolution from the viewpoint of wheat. Ten thousand years ago wheat was just a wild grass, one of many, confined to a small range in the Middle East. Suddenly, within just a few short millennia, it was grwing all over the world. According to the basic evolutionary criteria of survival and reproduction, wheat has become one of the most successful plants in the history of the earth.

### CHAPTER 6. BUILDING PYRAMIDS

- The earth's surface measures about 200 million sqaure miles, of which 60 million is land. As late as AD 1400, the vast majority of farmers, along with their plants and animals, clustered together in an area of just 4.25 million square miles - 2 per cent of the plant's surface. Everywhere else was too cold, too hot, too dry, too wet, or otherwise unsuited for cultivation. This minuscule 2 per cent of the earth's surface constituted the stage on which history unfolded. People found it difficult to leave their artificial islands. They could not abandon their houses, fields and granaries without grave risk of loss. Furthermore, as time went on they accumulated more and more things - objects, not easily transportable, thaat tied them down. Ancient farmers might seem to us dirt poor, but a typical family possessed more artefacts than an entire forager tribe.

- The Agricultural Revolution made the future far more important than it had ever been before. Farmers must always keep the futrue in mind and must work in its service. The agricultural economy was based on a seasonal cycle of production, comprising long months of cultivation followed by short peak periods of harvest. On the night following the end of a plentiful harvest the peasant might celebrate for all they were worth, but within a week or so they wre again up at dawn for a long day in the field. Although there was enough food for today, next week, and even next month, they had to worry about next year and the year after that. Concern about the future was rooted not only in seasonal cycles of production, but also in the fundamental uncertainty of agriculture. (...)

- The extra they produced fed the tiny minority of elites - kings, government officials, soldiers, priests, artists and thinkers - who fill the history books. History is something that very few people have been doing while everyone else was ploughing fields and carrying water buckets.

- The food surpluses produced by peasants, coupled with new transportation technology, eventually enabled more and more people to cram together first into large villages, then into towns, and finally into cities, all of them joined together by new kingdoms and commercial networks. Yet in order to take advantege of these new opportunities, food surpluses and improved transportation were not enough. The mere fact that one can feed a thousand people in the same town or a million people in the same kingdom does not guarantee that they can agree how to divide the land and water, how to settle disputes and conflicts, and how to act in times of drought or war.

- Despite the lack of such biological instincts, during the foraging era, hundreds of strangers were able to cooperate thanks to their shared myths. However, this cooperation was loose and limited. Every Sapiens band continued to run its life independently and to provide for most of its own needs. An archaic sociologist living 20,000 years ago, who had no knowledge of events following the Agricultural Revolution, might well have concluded that mythology had a fairly limited scope. Stories about ancestral spirits and tribal totems were strong enough to enable 500 people trade seashells, celebrate the odd festival, and join forces to wipe out a Neaderthal band, but no more than that. Mythology, the ancient sociologist would have thought, could not possibly enable millions of strangers to cooperate on a daily basis.

### CHAPTER 7. MEMORY OVERLOAD

- (...) the human brain has been adapted to store and process only particular types of information. In order to survive, ancient hunter-gatherers had to remember the shapes, qualities and behaviour patterns of thousands of plant and animal species. They had to remember that a wrinkled yellow mushroom growing in autumn under an elm tree is most probably poisonous, whereas as similar-looking mushroom growing in winter under an oak tree is a good stomach-ache remedy. Hunter-gatherers also had to bear in mind the opinions and relations of several dozen band members. If Lucy needed a band member's help to get John to stop harassing her, it was important for her to remember that John had fallen out last week with Mary, who would thus be a likely and enthusiastic ally. Consequently, evolutionary pressures have adapted the human brain to store immense quantities of botanical, zoological, topographical and social information.

### CHAPTER 8. THERE IS NO JUSTICE IN HISTORY

- The imagined orders sustaining these networks were neither neutral nor fair. They divided people into make-believe groups, arranged in a hierarchy.

- (...) the hierarchy of rich and poor - which mandates that rich people live in separate and more luxurious neighbourhoods, study in separate and more prestigious schools, and receive medical treatment in separate and beter-equipped facilities - seems perfectly sensible to many Americans and Europeans. Yet it's a proven fact that most rich people are rich for the simple reason that they were born into a rich family, while most poor people will remain poor throughout their lives simply because they were born into a poor family. Unfortunately, complex human societies seem to require imagined hierarchies and unjust discrimination. Of course not all hierarchies are morally identical, and some societies suffered from more extreme types of discrimination than others, yet scholars know of no large society that has been able to dispense with discrimination altogether. Time and again people have created order in their societies by classifying the population into imagined categories, such as superiors, commoners and slaves; whites and blacks; patricians and plebeians; Brahmins and Shudras; or rich and poor. These categories have regulated relations between millions of humans by making some people legally, politically or socially superior to others. Hierarchies serve an important function. They enable complete strangers to know how to treat one another without wasting the time and energy needed to become personally acquainted. A car dealer needs to know immediately how much effort to put into selling vehicles to the dozens of people who enter his agency every day. He can't make a detailed inquiry into the personality and wallet of each individual. Instead, he uses social cues - the way the person is dressed, his or her age, and perhaps even skin and hair color. That is how the dealer immediately distinguishes between the rich lawyer who may well buy an expensive luxury car, and a simple office clerk who has come only to look around and dream.

- Some of the earliest Chinese texts are oracle bones, dating to 1200 BC, used to divine the future. On one was engraved the question: 'Will Lady Hao's childbearing be lucky?' To which was written the reply: 'If the child is born on a ding day, lucky; if on a geng day, vastly auspicious.' However, Lady Hao was to give birth on a jiayin day. The text ends with the morose observation: 'Three weeks and one day later, on jiayin day, the child was born. Net lucky. It was a girl. More than 3,000 years later, when Communist China enacted the 'one child' policy, many Chinese families continued to regard the birth of a girl as a misforune. Parents would occasionally abandon or murder newborn baby girls in order to have another shot at gettting a boy. In many societies women were simply the property of men, most often their fathers, husbands or brothers. Rape, in many legal systems, falls under property violatioin - in other words, the victim is not the woman who was raped but the male who owns her.

### CHAPTER 9. THE ARROW OF HISTORY

- After the agricultural revolution, human societies grew ever larger and more complex, while the imagined constructs sustaining the social order also became more elaborate.

- One of the most interesting examples of this globalization is 'ethnic' cuisine. In an Italian restaurant we expect to find spaghetti in tomato sauce; in Polish and Irish restaurants lots of potatoes; in an Argentinian restaurant we can choose between dozens of kinds of beefsteaks; in an Indian restaurant hot chillies are incorporated into just about everything; and the highlight at any Swiss cafe is thick hot chocolate under an alp of whipped cream. But none of these foods is native to those nations. Tomatoes, chilli peppers and cocoa are all Mexican in origin; they reached Europe and Asia only after the Spaniards conquered Mexcico. Julius Caesar and Dante Alighieri never twirled tomato-drenched spaghetti on their forks (even forks hadn't been invented yet), William Tell never tasted chocolate, and Buddha never spiced up his food with chilli. Potatoes reached Poland and Ireland no more than 400 years ago. The only steak you could obtain in Argentina in 1492 was from a llama. Hollywood films have perpetuated an image of the Plains Indians as brave horsemen, courageously charging the wagons of European pioneers to protect the customs of their ancestors. However, these Native American horsemen were not the defenders of some ancient, authentic culture. Instead, they were the product of a major military and political revolution that swept the plains of western North America in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, a consequence of the arrival of European horses. In 1492 there were no horses in America. The culture of the nineteenth-centry Sioux and Apache has many sppealing features, but it was a modern culture - a result of global forces - much more than 'authentic'.

### CHAPTER 10. THE SCENT OF MONEY

- Osama Bin Laden, for all his hatred of American culture, American religion and American politics, was very fond of American dollars. How did money succeed where gods and kings failed?

- Ideal types of money enable people not merely to turn one thing into another, but to store wealth as well. Many valuables cannot be stored - such as time or beauty. Some things can be stored only for a short time, such as strawberries. Other things are more durable, but take up a lot of space and require expensive facilities and care. Grain, for example, can be stored for years, but to do so you need to build huge storehouses and guard against rats, mould, water, fire and thieves. Money, whether paper, computer bits or cowry shells, solves these problems. Cowry shells don't rot, are unpalatable to rats, can survive fires and are compact enough to be locked up in a safe. In order to use wealth it is not enough just to store it. It often needs to be transported from place to place. Some forms of wealth, such as real estate, cannot be transported at all. Commodities such as wheat and rice can be transported only with difficulty. Imagine a wealth farmer living in a moneyless land who emigrates to a distant province.

### CHAPTER 11. IMPERIAL VISIONS

### CHAPTER 12. THE LAW OF RELIGION

### CHAPTER 13. THE SECRET OF SUCCESS

### CHAPTER 14. THE DISCOVERY OF IGNORANCE

- But the single most remarkable and defining moment of the past 500 years came at 05:29:45 on 16 July 1945. At that precise second, American scientists detonated the first atomic bomb at Alamogordo, New Mexico. From that point onward, humankind had the capability not only to change the ourse of history, but to end it.

- Science needs more than just research to make progress. It depends on the mutual reinforcement of science, politics and economics. Political and economic institutions provide the resources without which scientific research is almost impossible. In return, scientific research provides new powers that are used, among other things. to obtain new resources, some of which are reinvested in research.

### CHAPTER 15. THE MARRIAGE OF SCIENCE AND EMPIRE

- In 1775 Asia accounted for 80 per cent of the world economy. The combined economies of India and China alone represented two-thirds of global production. In comparison, Europe was an economic dwarf. The global center of power shifted to Europe only between 1750 and 1850, when Europeans humiliated the Aisan powers of Asia. By 1900 Europeans firmly controlled the world's economy and most of its territory. In 1950 western Europe and the United States together accounted for more than half of global production, whereas China's portion had been reduced to 5 per cent.

- At this stage more and more Spanish soldiers and settlers began arriving in Mexico, some from Cuba, others all the way from Spain. When the local peoples realised what was happening, it was too late. Within a centruy of the landing at Vera Cruz, the native population of the Americas had shrunk by about 90 per cent, due mainly to unfamiliar diseases that reached America with the invaders. The survivors found themselves under the thumb of a greedy and racist regime that was far worse than that of the Aztecs. Ten years after Cortes landed in Mexico, Pizarro arrived on the shore of the Inca Empire. He had far fewer soliers than Cortes - his expedition numbered just 168 men! Yet Pizarro benefited from all the knowledge and experience gained in previous invasions. The Inca, in contrast, knew nothing about the fate of the Aztecs.

- Even puny European kingdoms such as Scotland and Denmark sent a few explore-and-conquer expeditions to America, but not one expedition of either exploration or conquest was ever sent to America from the Islamic world, India or China. The first non-European power that tried to send a military expedition ot America was Japan. That happend in June 1942.

- When the Muslim conquered India, they did not bring along archaeologists to systematically study Indian history, anthropologists to study Indian cultures, geologists to study Indian soils, or zoologists to study Indian fauna. When the British conquered India, they did all of these things.

- Linguistics received enthusiastic imperial support. The European empires believed that in order to govern effectively they must know the languages and cultures of their subjects.

- But the belief in Western superiority did not vanish. Instead, it took on new forms. Racism was replaced by culturism. Today's elites usually justify superiority in terms of historical differences between cultures rather than biological differences between races.

- Without imperial support, it is doubtufl whether modern science would have progressed very far.

- Behind the meteoric rise of both science and empire lurks one particularly important force: capitalism.

### CHAPTER 16. THE CAPITALIST CREED

- Smith's claim that the selfish human urge to increase private profits is the basis for collective wealth is one of the most revolutionary ideas in human history. (...) Egoism is altruism.

- Smith denied the traditional contradiction between wealth and morality, and threw open the gates of heaven for the rich. In Smith's story, people become rich not by despoiling their neighbours, but by increasing the overall size of the pie.

- The human economy has nevertheless managed to keep on growing throughout the modern era, thanks only to the fact that scientists come up with another discovery or gadget every few years.

- In 1484 Christopher Columbus approached the king of Portugal with the proposal that he finance a fleet that would sail westward to find a new trade route to East Asia. (...) there was no quarantee that the investment would yield a return. The king of Portugal declined. (...) He then tried his luck with Ferdinand and Isabella, rulers of newly united Spain. (...) he managed to convince Queen Isabella to invest. As every schoolchild knows, Isabella hit the jackpot.

- In order to increase the number of potential investors and reduce the risk they incurred, Europeans turned to limited liability joint-stock companies. Instead of a single investor betting all his money on a single rickety ship, the joint-stock company collected money from a large number of investors, each risking only a small portion of his capital.

- While the French overseas empire was crumbling, the British Empire was expanding repidly. Like the Dutch Empire before it, the British Empire was established and ren largely by private joint-stock companies based in the London stock exchange. (...) The Indian subcontinent too was conquered not by the British state, but by the mercenary army of the British East India Company.

- Capitalism has killed millions out of cold indifference coupled with greed. The Atlantic slave trade did not stem from racist hatred towards Africans. The individuals who bought the shares, the brokers who sold them, and the managers of the slave-trade companies rarely ghought about the Africans. Nor did the owners of the sugar plantations. Many owners lived far from their plantations, and the only information they demanded were neat ledgers of profits and losses. (...) the British East India Company cared more about its profits than about the lives of 10 million Benalis. VOC's military compaigns in Indonesia were financed by upstanding Dutch burghers who loved their children, gave to charity, and enjoyed good music and fine art, but had no regard for the suffering of the inhabitants of Java, Sumatra and Malacca.

### CHAPTER 17. THE WHEELS OF INDUSTRY
